Contracting with the U.K. government.
-------------------------------------

"I have a dream ... to make my government better."

Government contracts.  Government Software Contracts. The phrase
conjures up images of bribery, corruption, fat profits for next no
work. I am of course hoping this is all true. But for the moment if
you talk about software in government, you have to talk about GDS.


GDS and "the preference"
------------------------

Way back when, Liam Maxwell was a well respected IT consultant and
wrote a small paper that basically said "If the UK government applied
industry best practises in developing software, and switched to Open
Source Software to stop getting ripped off, they could save eight
billion a year".

For some reason the ca-Ching sound of 8bn reached the ears of Tory
Cabinet Office minister Francis Maude, who replied with "well go on
then".  So Liam helped set up, GDS which then set about changing UK
governments approach to software.  It hired people to write new code
for high profile new projects.  Things like the gov.uk website, the
new look DVLA site and land registry.

They released their code on GitHub , they did things "Agile", and they
made a noise.  But one of the biggest noises was almost an accident.
You see They also produced service manuals - The cabinet office's
not-really-optional directions to the rest of government on how to buy
and develop software.  And the story goes that one of the more
progressive and leading Scrummasters was asked to put the finishing
touches to the manual and get it out there. And he wrote that
government should in purchasing and developing software "have a
preference for" open source software.  It went out (you know - publish
early and often).  And then his bosses noticed that *policy* had just
been made.  Big policy, policy that affects the billions of pounds
spent each year.  But also policy that is exactly why the GDS existed.

So they went into a room, shut the door and discussed it. Came out for
some strong coffee and went back in.  And came out again, and said,
"yeah OK. Leave it. It's policy now".

I want to emphasise just what an impact this had.  I was a lowly
software entrepreneur working in the UK for a university in Texas (cos
they were the only people I could find who would pay me to write free
software. Writing free software in the UK for pay was / is hard, but
for public bodies. Forget it. Texas got it.  But I despaired of my
government getting it.)

And suddenly there was the cabinet office, Sir Humphrey himself,
saying Open source is the way to go.

It was electric. The very next day I had bought my ticket to a local
government conference and I went around telling everyone there who
would listen how we had to do this, set up pilot projects and so on
(see http://www.oss4gov.org).

The industry papers were crazy for this, this was real policy and it
mattered that we were going to go in the right direction for once.

And it meant that there could be a dream - it *might* be worth working
for the government.  Instead of working for Texas, I could work for
Whitehall. Or even better I could build software that solves real
world problems - and solve them once for the UK. And if they worked
for Uzbekistan or United Arab Emirates as well, great.  It's a big
dream.

The Dream
---------

You see while we all moan and gripe and make fun of bureaucracy, the
vast majority of government services are pointing in the right
direction.  They make lives better for most people, protect those who
are most vulnerable and essentially pick up the pieces.  It does not
always work right, often badly done, underfunded and over subscribed
but in the end most public servants take pride in doing the right
thing and going in the right direction.

If you look at LDSL list, you can see over 2000 statutory services -
the vast majority of which either have to be digital, or are going to
benefit greatly from going digital.

And if you are a developer you know that why should our tax dollars go
on proprietary software licenses for things where there is basically
no private market (the demand for software to help Returning Officers
to organise Polling booths is sky high amoungst international banks
and hedge funds).

I rant on about this in the 'OSS4Gov
manifesto. <http://www.oss4gov.org/manifesto>'_

So yes, OSS4gov.  I got a bit carried away. "Look the GDS says
OSS. That must mean that every government depart now wants good OSS
developers to build everything.  I will head off to the nearest
government conference and tell then so. So I started a campaign
website, headed off to LGSA and glad-handed anyone who would listen,
paid for a big breakfast bash (visitors - none) and ... Nothing
happened.

Was I dejected? Was I down heartend? Yes actually.  And well out of
pocket for sponsoring lame breakfasts.

But the dream is stil there.

It's because in the digital age, when you are doing socially
beneficial work, why in hells name should you have to fight crappy
software to get the job done.  Shouldn't you get the best software
globally possible to do your job, and shouldn't I as a taxpayer get
the best deal possible?  In the (excellent, go read it) book "Red
Platoon", Medal of Honor winner Clinton Romesha describes the USAF
squadron who supported him during a massive Taliban attack as having a
sign above the mess door - "The mission is a 19 year old with a
rifle. Everything else is support."

Whilst not taking away anything from that sentiment, I want to steal
it to underline why I think OSS in government actually matters - ::

    "The mission is a nurse with a bedpan 
     Everything else will be DevOps"

I want to spend the next decade building open source software that
makes people's lives better, doing it slowly, correctly, and spreading
it out over countries that really could do with good digital
government services but have no hope of affording it.  I mean once
California pays for a social worker case management system, what is
needed is good devs in each country to manage the localisation and
... Everyone wins.

So, how hard can it be to get one of these open source contracts.  I
mean I am a professional so *doing the work* is not a problem.  How
hard can finding the work be?

Turns out pretty darn difficult.

That's the story for part 2.
