The Journey of Mikado Software
==============================

I was made redundant in 2008, from a nice CTO job in London's City, at the
height of the financial crisis.  I decided not to take it lying down. I even
registered "www.youwanttohirepaulbrian.com".  (I felt better, but its not a job
move I would recommend :-) And yet, two weeks later, I walked into a new, but
lower-paying job, and so I hustled, and hunted, moved from job to contract,
worked my way up the salary ladder, started my own consultancy and landed the
*big gig*.

It was the worst move I ever made. 

I sat in a car for between 2 and 4 hours a day (and I never knew how long the
trip would be).  And I was not curing cancer so I could hardly claim my work was
worth the sacrifice.

I saw my children only when they were asleep, or at weekends, when I was
exhausted. My wife saw me for about ten minutes before we climbed into bed and
slept shattered.  It put strains on my marriage that have not yet been ironed
out, and I have no idea if I have damaged my kids or not.

But I know I put on nearly two stone.

So, as that contract ended, I swore to stop.  I was a Software Engineer by trade
and training, all I did was bits and bytes. I did not need to actually be in an
office, watched to see if I was slacking off.  I could work remotely, from
anywhere, for anyone.

It took *months* (over the New Year) to find people willing to hire a remote
worker.  And yet as they did, things turned a corner.  I was able to walk into
work, able to make breakfast for my kids, let my wife have a lie in.  

It is not heaven, bills still need to be paid, relationships repaired, the office is tiny.

But like nearly 3 out of 4 workers, my job does not need to involve me
travelling to the same office as everyone else.  Nearly 75% of us could do the
same job from *anywhere*.  And we could do it minutes from our families, our
lives.

The more of us who make that break, who escape, the more our societies will
shift.  Till raising a family stops being a struggle that tears us from being
productive in work.

This site is about making that break, and keeping to the promises it involves.

Sign up, I will encourage you, and keep you up to date.


